---
title: An experimental, hobbyist, GURPS-inspired RPG System.
description: An experimental, hobbyist, GURPS-inspired RPG System.
date: 2022-05-04
tags: 
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
For a long time I’ve been a RPG aficionado - I played many different games both as a character and as a game master, I participated in conferences, wrote countless homebrew systems and rules, helped translate GURPS supplements to my native idiom (in an informal capacity). But then I just stopped. Life events, new friendships… A 25 year hiatus until I was recently reintroduced to the hobby and I’ve been fascinated by learning about epverything that happened in these years - from new concepts & systems to entirely new branches of RPGs… I find even business histories (like the D&D 4 flop and the emergence of PathFinder) to be entertaining. 
I have been playing many “new” games and systems, from Fate to D&D 5 to Numera, Apocalypse world, Cortex Prime... I loved to learn about all sorts of new mechanics introduced in these years. So for no reason other than my own entertainment and curiosity, I started playing around with the idea of making a modernized GURPS. 

What do I mean by “modernized”?
First of all, there’s nothing wrong with GURPS, now in its fourth edition. It was a pioneer, the first generic system, the first popular one that provided the tools for players to create detailed characters free from the preconceived boxes of “classes”. GURPS is immensely fun to play, has a battle-tested, mature and balanced set of rules, an active community plus hundreds of supplements with world descriptions and adventures. 

But it’s also a system that has a heritage that traces back to miniature tabletop games, with strong emphasis on a body of rules that allow players and game master to spend as much time on mechanical gameplay as on role playing. 

And yet (for me at least) the fun of role playing games IS role playing. 

## Narrative focused systems
I remember vividly when “Vampire the maskarade” was released. It was shockingly refreshing in how it re-focused the conversation completely around story telling and role playing. All supported by a wonderfully detailed universe description and a rule-light system that gave lots of flexibility for players. 

It was game changer and influenced a generation of new players and books. And it also contributed to the idea that rules-light = narrative-focused. 

And that’s not universally true. 

D. Vincent Baker, creator of many games including Apocalypse World, said something to the effect that the rules should exist to support AND stimulate narrative. I fully hearted agree.

GURPS is clearly heavy-handed on rules, and yet its character creation mechanics allowed players to create characters with nuances that other systems at the time couldn’t. What’s more important to narrative than interesting, nuanced characters? 

Back to the question, what does a “modernized, GURPS-inspired” system means? I certainly don’t know yet, but I do have some a very clear idea of what it’s NOT:

It’s not about “simplifying the rules”
Simplifying rules just for the sake of making them easier is a valid goal, but also an uninteresting one - if anything else because there are already lots of games and books that goes in this direction - far from unexplored territory. Besides there are other techniques you can use to ease the learning curve - to quote D. Vincent Baker again and his Apocalypse world, you can organize the rules in layers such that a small core can be enough to start, with additional layers of complexity (always in service of gameplay) being available to use as desired. 

It’s also not about making a collage of new mechanics on top of the existing rules. Dice pools, moves, adjective ladders, new ways of dealing with character damage & recovery - RPG systems released in the past years introduced a myriad of extremely interesting mechanics. It’s certainly worth investigating to what extend newer mechanics like these would contribute to role playing in a GURPS-inspired system, but not forcing them inside to give GURPS a superficial varnish of newness. 

So, why GURPS then?
I’m biased: I have fond memories of playing GURPS and I’m can’t say I am 100% able to discern the merits of the system from the serotonine-filled memories in my brain. That being said, I do believe GURPS got a lot right, and I do believe that a crunchier system where rules exist with the main purpose of supporting and encouraging role play would be immensely fun to play. 


