---
title: Skills-based or not?
description: Skills-based or not?
date: 2022-05-05
tags: 
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
People have their fair share of criticism for Skills based RPGs such as GURPS. 

A common complaint is that it adds a lot of bookkeeping - a long list of cruft in the character sheet where only some items are used frequently. 

Another common gripe is that it disrupts creativity and role play. It can happen in two ways:
First, some players use them as a crutch: Instead of coming up with a descriptive explanation for how they are attempting to do something, they just roll the dice for the skill check—tied to a chair in a locked room? Just Roll for “escape.” Want to convince the guards to let you pass? Just Roll for “convincing”: the player didn’t use creativity; they didn’t provide any hooks that the GM could use to make “failing” fit as another layer on top of the history. 
Second: some players end up being limited by skills (or the lack of them):
When facing a situation for which they don’t have the appropriate skill, they just defer. instead of trying to improvise, attempting something that, even if stupid, could contribute to moving the narrative, they defer to other members of the party, to an NPC, to the GM…

I agree with both. I think bookkeeping of a complex character sheet does take away from gameplay. An over-reliance on a skill list does take away experimentation and drama. 

Despite the downsides, though, skill-based systems have one tremendous advantage that still makes them worth it: they give players the freedom to create characters outside of any boundaries - you don’t pick a cookie-cutter “class” - you pick whatever makes sense to your character back history and to what you like to play. A fighter with an animal companion? A Druid that is excellent sword skills? It’s all possible. 

## How do you make a skill system better?

One twist on skills introduced in the past few years by games such as Apocalypse World is “moves.” 
It’s hard to summarize; I’m certainly oversimplifying here, but “moves” kind of act like skills with one big difference: they widen the spectrum of possible outcomes besides simply “success” or “fail.” Each move can have its own mechanisms, and many define different degrees is success and failure, with varying consequences for the character. 
From a game design perspective, I love this - the games I played using this system were ridiculously fun. But it doesn’t really drastically change role-playing, as the outcomes are still baked into the system. There are more possible outcomes, the rules are fun, and each “move” is almost a mini-game within the game, but that’s not what I’m looking for in this specific system. 

Another variation on the old “skills” formula are “skills” as a combination of attributes. The precursor here was White Wolf’s “Vampire - the Masquerade”: Does the player want to shoot a gun? Roll for Dexterity + Firearms. Wanna try to identify what kind of gun the other guy is holding? There’s no skill precisely for that, but the GM (called Storyteller) might ask the player to roll, for example, Perception + Firearms. It’s a little more free-form, with room for improvisation, which gives players a chance to use their skills in surprising ways. 

In the end, I do believe that a skills-based system has enough merits that I will still use one, but I plan to take a couple of hints from the White Wolf system. I might not use “moves,” but I will follow a core principle that I learned is behind the powered by apocalypse system: every rule should exist with the purpose of making the gaming, the fun, and the role play happen. 